docs/observability/observability.md, before:

---
title: "Observability"
sidebar_position: 1
---

The gateway provides structured logging, Prometheus metrics, and OpenTelemetry distributed tracing for production monitoring.

## Structured Logging

Logging uses [zap](https://github.com/uber-go/zap) for high-performance structured output. The log format uses variable substitution for access log style output:

```yaml
logging:
  level: "info"        # debug, info, warn, error
  output: "stdout"     # stdout, stderr, or file path
  format: '$remote_addr - [$time_iso8601] "$request_method $request_uri" $status $body_bytes_sent "$http_user_agent" $response_time'
  rotation:
    max_size: 100      # MB before rotation (default 100)
    max_backups: 3     # old files to keep (default 3)
    max_age: 28        # days to retain (default 28)
    compress: true     # gzip rotated files (default true)
    local_time: false  # local time in filenames (default false)
```

All [variables](../transformations/transformations.md#variables) are available in the format string (`$remote_addr`, `$status`, `$upstream_response_time`, etc.).

### Log Levels

| Level | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `debug` | Verbose debugging information |
| `info` | Normal operational events (default) |
| `warn` | Potentially harmful situations |
| `error` | Error conditions |

### Log Rotation

When `output` is a file path, the gateway automatically rotates log files using [lumberjack](https://github.com/natefinch/lumberjack). Rotation is configured under `logging.rotation`:

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| `max_size` | int | `100` | Maximum size in megabytes before the log file is rotated |
| `max_backups` | int | `3` | Number of old log files to retain |
| `max_age` | int | `28` | Number of days to retain old log files |
| `compress` | bool | `true` | Gzip-compress rotated log files |
| `local_time` | bool | `false` | Use local time in rotated file names (UTC by default) |

Rotation settings are ignored when `output` is `stdout` or `stderr`.

## Prometheus Metrics

Enable the Prometheus metrics endpoint on the admin API:

```yaml
admin:
  enabled: true
  port: 8081
  metrics:
    enabled: true
    path: "/metrics"     # default
```

Scrape metrics at `http://localhost:8081/metrics`:

```bash
# Fetch all Prometheus metrics
curl http://localhost:8081/metrics

# Filter for specific metric families
curl -s http://localhost:8081/metrics | grep gateway_request
```

### Collected Metrics

The gateway exports metrics for:
- Request counts and latencies (per route)
- Backend health and response times
- Circuit breaker state transitions
- Cache hit/miss ratios
- Rate limiter rejections
- Retry attempts and budget exhaustion
- WAF blocks and detections
- Traffic split distribution

## Distributed Tracing

OpenTelemetry tracing with OTLP export:

```yaml
tracing:
  enabled: true
  exporter: "otlp"
  endpoint: "otel-collector:4317"
  service_name: "api-gateway"
  sample_rate: 0.1          # sample 10% of requests
  insecure: true             # use insecure gRPC (for local collectors)
  headers:                   # extra headers for OTLP exporter
    Authorization: "Bearer ${OTEL_TOKEN}"
```

### Trace Propagation

The gateway propagates trace context using W3C Trace Context headers (`traceparent`, `tracestate`). Incoming trace headers are forwarded to backends, and new spans are created for each request through the gateway.

### Verifying Tracing

Check tracing status via the admin API:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8081/tracing
```

### Request ID

Every request gets a unique `X-Request-ID` header. If the client provides one, it is preserved. Otherwise, the gateway generates a new UUID. The request ID is available as `$request_id` in log format strings, header transforms, and rule expressions.

```bash
# The gateway returns X-Request-ID in responses
curl -v http://localhost:8080/api/test 2>&1 | grep X-Request-ID

# Send a custom request ID
curl -H "X-Request-ID: my-trace-id" http://localhost:8080/api/test
```

## Enhanced Access Logging

Per-route access log overrides allow fine-grained control over what is logged for each route. The global logging middleware remains the single log emission point — per-route settings configure _what_ to capture and _when_ to log.

### Per-Route Overrides

```yaml
routes:
  - id: payments
    path: /api/payments
    backends:
      - url: http://payments:8080
    access_log:
      enabled: true
      format: '$remote_addr $request_method $request_uri $status $response_time'
      headers_include:
        - Content-Type
        - X-Request-Id
        - Authorization
      sensitive_headers:
        - X-Internal-Token
      body:
        enabled: true
        max_size: 4096
        content_types: ["application/json"]
        request: true
        response: true
      conditions:
        status_codes: ["4xx", "5xx"]
        methods: ["POST", "PUT", "DELETE"]
        sample_rate: 0.1
```

### Disabling Logging for a Route

```yaml
routes:
  - id: health-check
    path: /health
    backends:
      - url: http://app:8080
    access_log:
      enabled: false
```

### Header Logging with Masking

Headers listed in `sensitive_headers` are logged as `***`. The following headers are always masked by default: `Authorization`, `Cookie`, `Set-Cookie`, `X-API-Key`. User-configured sensitive headers are merged with these defaults.

Use `headers_include` to log only specific headers, or `headers_exclude` to log all headers except some. These two options are mutually exclusive.

### Body Capture

When `body.enabled` is true, request and/or response bodies are captured (up to `max_size` bytes) and included in the log output. Body capture is pass-through — writes are never buffered or delayed.

The `content_types` filter limits capture to specific MIME types (e.g., only capture JSON bodies, not binary uploads).

### Conditional Logging

- **`status_codes`**: Only log responses matching these patterns. Supports single codes (`"200"`), ranges (`"200-299"`), and class patterns (`"4xx"`, `"5xx"`).
- **`methods`**: Only log requests with these HTTP methods.
- **`sample_rate`**: Log a random sample of requests (0.0-1.0, where 0 means log all).

### Admin API

```bash
# View per-route access log configs
curl http://localhost:8081/access-log
```

## Key Config Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `logging.level` | string | `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error` |
| `logging.output` | string | `stdout`, `stderr`, or file path |
| `logging.format` | string | Access log format with `$variable` substitution |
| `logging.rotation.max_size` | int | Max MB before rotation (default 100) |
| `logging.rotation.max_backups` | int | Old rotated files to keep (default 3) |
| `logging.rotation.max_age` | int | Days to retain old files (default 28) |
| `logging.rotation.compress` | bool | Gzip rotated files (default true) |
| `logging.rotation.local_time` | bool | Local time in filenames (default false) |
| `admin.metrics.enabled` | bool | Enable Prometheus metrics |
| `admin.metrics.path` | string | Metrics endpoint path (default `/metrics`) |
| `tracing.exporter` | string | `otlp` |
| `tracing.endpoint` | string | OTLP collector endpoint |
| `tracing.sample_rate` | float | Sampling rate 0.0-1.0 |
| `tracing.service_name` | string | Service name in traces |

See [Configuration Reference](../reference/configuration-reference.md#observability) for all fields.

Commit message:

Rename project from Gateway to Runway
Comprehensive rebrand: module path github.com/wudi/gateway →
github.com/wudi/runway, all directories (cmd/runway, internal/runway,
runway/), Go types (Runway, RunwayBuilder, RunwayError), Prometheus
metrics (runway_*), HTTP headers (X-Runway-*), K8s annotations
(runway.wudi.io/), Helm chart, Dockerfile, docker-compose, protobuf,
documentation, and test fixtures. External deps (gateway-api,
grpc-gateway) and HTTP standard names (Bad Gateway) are preserved.

docs/observability/observability.md, after:

---
title: "Observability"
sidebar_position: 1
---

The runway provides structured logging, Prometheus metrics, and OpenTelemetry distributed tracing for production monitoring.

## Structured Logging

Logging uses [zap](https://github.com/uber-go/zap) for high-performance structured output. The log format uses variable substitution for access log style output:

```yaml
logging:
  level: "info"        # debug, info, warn, error
  output: "stdout"     # stdout, stderr, or file path
  format: '$remote_addr - [$time_iso8601] "$request_method $request_uri" $status $body_bytes_sent "$http_user_agent" $response_time'
  rotation:
    max_size: 100      # MB before rotation (default 100)
    max_backups: 3     # old files to keep (default 3)
    max_age: 28        # days to retain (default 28)
    compress: true     # gzip rotated files (default true)
    local_time: false  # local time in filenames (default false)
```

All [variables](../transformations/transformations.md#variables) are available in the format string (`$remote_addr`, `$status`, `$upstream_response_time`, etc.).

### Log Levels

| Level | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `debug` | Verbose debugging information |
| `info` | Normal operational events (default) |
| `warn` | Potentially harmful situations |
| `error` | Error conditions |

### Log Rotation

When `output` is a file path, the runway automatically rotates log files using [lumberjack](https://github.com/natefinch/lumberjack). Rotation is configured under `logging.rotation`:

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| `max_size` | int | `100` | Maximum size in megabytes before the log file is rotated |
| `max_backups` | int | `3` | Number of old log files to retain |
| `max_age` | int | `28` | Number of days to retain old log files |
| `compress` | bool | `true` | Gzip-compress rotated log files |
| `local_time` | bool | `false` | Use local time in rotated file names (UTC by default) |

Rotation settings are ignored when `output` is `stdout` or `stderr`.

## Prometheus Metrics

Enable the Prometheus metrics endpoint on the admin API:

```yaml
admin:
  enabled: true
  port: 8081
  metrics:
    enabled: true
    path: "/metrics"     # default
```

Scrape metrics at `http://localhost:8081/metrics`:

```bash
# Fetch all Prometheus metrics
curl http://localhost:8081/metrics

# Filter for specific metric families
curl -s http://localhost:8081/metrics | grep runway_request
```

### Collected Metrics

The runway exports metrics for:
- Request counts and latencies (per route)
- Backend health and response times
- Circuit breaker state transitions
- Cache hit/miss ratios
- Rate limiter rejections
- Retry attempts and budget exhaustion
- WAF blocks and detections
- Traffic split distribution

## Distributed Tracing

OpenTelemetry tracing with OTLP export:

```yaml
tracing:
  enabled: true
  exporter: "otlp"
  endpoint: "otel-collector:4317"
  service_name: "api-runway"
  sample_rate: 0.1          # sample 10% of requests
  insecure: true             # use insecure gRPC (for local collectors)
  headers:                   # extra headers for OTLP exporter
    Authorization: "Bearer ${OTEL_TOKEN}"
```

### Trace Propagation

The runway propagates trace context using W3C Trace Context headers (`traceparent`, `tracestate`). Incoming trace headers are forwarded to backends, and new spans are created for each request through the runway.

### Verifying Tracing

Check tracing status via the admin API:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8081/tracing
```

### Request ID

Every request gets a unique `X-Request-ID` header. If the client provides one, it is preserved. Otherwise, the runway generates a new UUID. The request ID is available as `$request_id` in log format strings, header transforms, and rule expressions.

```bash
# The runway returns X-Request-ID in responses
curl -v http://localhost:8080/api/test 2>&1 | grep X-Request-ID

# Send a custom request ID
curl -H "X-Request-ID: my-trace-id" http://localhost:8080/api/test
```

## Enhanced Access Logging

Per-route access log overrides allow fine-grained control over what is logged for each route. The global logging middleware remains the single log emission point — per-route settings configure _what_ to capture and _when_ to log.

### Per-Route Overrides

```yaml
routes:
  - id: payments
    path: /api/payments
    backends:
      - url: http://payments:8080
    access_log:
      enabled: true
      format: '$remote_addr $request_method $request_uri $status $response_time'
      headers_include:
        - Content-Type
        - X-Request-Id
        - Authorization
      sensitive_headers:
        - X-Internal-Token
      body:
        enabled: true
        max_size: 4096
        content_types: ["application/json"]
        request: true
        response: true
      conditions:
        status_codes: ["4xx", "5xx"]
        methods: ["POST", "PUT", "DELETE"]
        sample_rate: 0.1
```

### Disabling Logging for a Route

```yaml
routes:
  - id: health-check
    path: /health
    backends:
      - url: http://app:8080
    access_log:
      enabled: false
```

### Header Logging with Masking

Headers listed in `sensitive_headers` are logged as `***`. The following headers are always masked by default: `Authorization`, `Cookie`, `Set-Cookie`, `X-API-Key`. User-configured sensitive headers are merged with these defaults.

Use `headers_include` to log only specific headers, or `headers_exclude` to log all headers except some. These two options are mutually exclusive.

### Body Capture

When `body.enabled` is true, request and/or response bodies are captured (up to `max_size` bytes) and included in the log output. Body capture is pass-through — writes are never buffered or delayed.

The `content_types` filter limits capture to specific MIME types (e.g., only capture JSON bodies, not binary uploads).

### Conditional Logging

- **`status_codes`**: Only log responses matching these patterns. Supports single codes (`"200"`), ranges (`"200-299"`), and class patterns (`"4xx"`, `"5xx"`).
- **`methods`**: Only log requests with these HTTP methods.
- **`sample_rate`**: Log a random sample of requests (0.0-1.0, where 0 means log all).

### Admin API

```bash
# View per-route access log configs
curl http://localhost:8081/access-log
```

## Key Config Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `logging.level` | string | `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error` |
| `logging.output` | string | `stdout`, `stderr`, or file path |
| `logging.format` | string | Access log format with `$variable` substitution |
| `logging.rotation.max_size` | int | Max MB before rotation (default 100) |
| `logging.rotation.max_backups` | int | Old rotated files to keep (default 3) |
| `logging.rotation.max_age` | int | Days to retain old files (default 28) |
| `logging.rotation.compress` | bool | Gzip rotated files (default true) |
| `logging.rotation.local_time` | bool | Local time in filenames (default false) |
| `admin.metrics.enabled` | bool | Enable Prometheus metrics |
| `admin.metrics.path` | string | Metrics endpoint path (default `/metrics`) |
| `tracing.exporter` | string | `otlp` |
| `tracing.endpoint` | string | OTLP collector endpoint |
| `tracing.sample_rate` | float | Sampling rate 0.0-1.0 |
| `tracing.service_name` | string | Service name in traces |

See [Configuration Reference](../reference/configuration-reference.md#observability) for all fields.
